.\"
.\" Sun Microsystems, Inc. gratefully acknowledges The Open Group for
.\" permission to reproduce portions of its copyrighted documentation.
.\" Original documentation from The Open Group can be obtained online at
.\" http://www.opengroup.org/bookstore/.
.\"
.\" The Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers and The Open
.\" Group, have given us permission to reprint portions of their
.\" documentation.
.\"
.\" In the following statement, the phrase ``this text'' refers to portions
.\" of the system documentation.
.\"
.\" Portions of this text are reprinted and reproduced in electronic form
.\" in the SunOS Reference Manual, from IEEE Std 1003.1, 2004 Edition,
.\" Standard for Information Technology -- Portable Operating System
.\" Interface (POSIX), The Open Group Base Specifications Issue 6,
.\" Copyright (C) 2001-2004 by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics
.\" Engineers, Inc and The Open Group.  In the event of any discrepancy
.\" between these versions and the original IEEE and The Open Group
.\" Standard, the original IEEE and The Open Group Standard is the referee
.\" document.  The original Standard can be obtained online at
.\" http://www.opengroup.org/unix/online.html.
.\"
.\" This notice shall appear on any product containing this material.
.\"
.\" The contents of this file are subject to the terms of the
.\" Common Development and Distribution License (the "License").
.\" You may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
.\"
.\" You can obtain a copy of the license at usr/src/OPENSOLARIS.LICENSE
.\" or http://www.opensolaris.org/os/licensing.
.\" See the License for the specific language governing permissions
.\" and limitations under the License.
.\"
.\" When distributing Covered Code, include this CDDL HEADER in each
.\" file and include the License file at usr/src/OPENSOLARIS.LICENSE.
.\" If applicable, add the following below this CDDL HEADER, with the
.\" fields enclosed by brackets "[]" replaced with your own identifying
.\" information: Portions Copyright [yyyy] [name of copyright owner]
.\"
.\"
.\" Copyright 1989 AT&T
.\" Portions Copyright (c) 1992, X/Open Company Limited.  All Rights Reserved.
.\" Copyright (c) 2005, Sun Microsystems, Inc.  All Rights Reserved.
.\" Copyright 2024 Peter Tribble
.\"
.TH MORE 1 "March 21, 2024"
.SH NAME
more, page \- browse or page through a text file
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
\fB/usr/bin/more\fR [\fB-cdflrsuw\fR] [\fB-lines\fR] [+ \fIlinenumber\fR]
     [+/ \fIpattern\fR] [\fIfile\fR]...
.fi

.LP
.nf
\fB/usr/bin/page\fR [\fB-cdflrsuw\fR] [\fB-lines\fR] [+ \fIlinenumber\fR]
     [+/ \fIpattern\fR] [\fIfile\fR]...
.fi

.SH DESCRIPTION
For the standards compliant \fBmore\fR utility previously shipped as
\fB/usr/xpg4/bin/more\fR, see \fBless\fR(1).
.sp
.LP
The \fBmore\fR utility is a filter that displays the contents of a text file on
the terminal, one screenful at a time.  It normally pauses after each
screenful and then prints \fB--More--\fR at the bottom of the screen. If
\fBmore\fR is reading from a file rather than a pipe, the percentage of
characters displayed so far is also shown.
.sp
.LP
The \fBmore\fR utility scrolls up to display one more line in response to a
\fBRETURN\fR character. \fBmore\fR displays another screenful in response to a
\fBSPACE\fR character. Other commands are listed below.
.sp
.LP
The \fBpage\fR utility clears the screen before displaying the next screenful
of text. \fBpage\fR only provides a one-line overlap between screens.
.sp
.LP
The \fBmore\fR utility sets the terminal to \fBNOECHO\fR mode, so that the
output can be continuous. Commands that you type do not normally show up on
your terminal, except for the \fB/\fR and \fB!\fR commands.
.sp
.LP
The \fBmore\fR utility exits after displaying the last specified file.
.sp
.LP
If the standard output is not a terminal, \fBmore\fR acts just like
\fBcat\fR(1), except that a header is printed before each file in a series.
.SH OPTIONS
.ne 2
.na
\fB\fB-c\fR \fR
.ad
.RS 7n
Clears before displaying. Redraws the screen instead of scrolling for faster
displays. This option is ignored if the terminal does not have the ability to
clear to the end of a line.
.RE

.sp
.ne 2
.na
\fB\fB-d\fR \fR
.ad
.RS 7n
Displays error messages rather than ringing the terminal bell if an
unrecognized command is used. This is helpful for inexperienced users.
.RE

.sp
.ne 2
.na
\fB\fB-s\fR \fR
.ad
.RS 7n
Squeeze.  Replaces multiple blank lines with a single blank line. This is
helpful when viewing \fBnroff\fR(1) output on the screen.
.RE

.sp
.ne 2
.na
\fB\fB-f\fR \fR
.ad
.RS 7n
Does not fold long lines. This is useful when lines contain nonprinting
characters or escape sequences, such as those generated when \fBnroff\fR(1)
output is piped through \fBul\fR(1).
.RE

.sp
.ne 2
.na
\fB\fB-l\fR \fR
.ad
.RS 7n
Does not treat \fBFORMFEED\fR characters (Control-l) as page breaks. If
\fB-l\fR is not used, \fBmore\fR pauses to accept commands after any line
containing a \fB^L\fR character (Control-l). Also, if a file begins with a
\fBFORMFEED\fR, the screen is cleared before the file is printed.
.RE

.sp
.ne 2
.na
\fB\fB-r\fR \fR
.ad
.RS 7n
Normally, \fBmore\fR ignores control characters that it does not interpret in
some way. The \fB-r\fR option causes these to be displayed as \fB^\fR\fIC\fR
where \fIC\fR stands for any such control character.
.RE

.sp
.ne 2
.na
\fB\fB-u\fR \fR
.ad
.RS 7n
Suppresses generation of underlining escape sequences. Normally, \fBmore\fR
handles underlining, such as that produced by \fBnroff\fR(1), in a manner
appropriate to the terminal. If the terminal can perform underlining or has a
stand-out mode, \fBmore\fR supplies appropriate escape sequences as called for
in the text file.
.RE

.sp
.ne 2
.na
\fB\fB-w\fR \fR
.ad
.RS 7n
Normally, \fBmore\fR exits when it comes to the end of its input. With
\fB-w\fR, however, \fBmore\fR prompts and waits for any key to be struck before
exiting.
.RE

.sp
.ne 2
.na
\fB\fB-\fR\fIlines\fR\fR
.ad
.RS 7n
Displays the indicated number of \fIlines\fR in each screenful, rather than the
default (the number of lines in the terminal screen less two).
.RE

.sp
.ne 2
.na
\fB\fB+\fR\fIlinenumber\fR\fR
.ad
.RS 7n
Start up at \fIlinenumber\fR.
.RE

.sp
.ne 2
.na
\fB\fB+/\fR\fIpattern\fR\fR
.ad
.RS 7n
Start up two lines above the line containing the regular expression
\fIpattern\fR. \fBNote:\fR Unlike editors, this construct should \fInot\fR end
with a `\fB/\fR.' If it does, then the trailing slash is taken as a character
in the search pattern.
.RE

.SH USAGE
.SS "Environment"
\fBmore\fR uses the terminal's \fBterminfo\fR(5) entry to determine its display
characteristics.
.sp
.LP
\fBmore\fR looks in the environment variable \fBMORE\fR for any preset options.
For instance, to page through files using the \fB-c\fR mode by default, set the
value of this variable to \fB-c\fR. (Normally, the command sequence to set up
this environment variable is placed in the \fB\&.login\fR or \fB\&.profile\fR
file).
.SS "Commands"
The commands take effect immediately. It is not necessary to type a carriage
return unless the command requires a \fIfile\fR, \fIcommand\fR,
\fItagstring\fR, or \fIpattern\fR. Up to the time when the command character
itself is given, the user may type the line kill character to cancel the
numerical argument being formed. In addition, the user may type the erase
character to redisplay the `\fB--More--(\fR\fIxx\fR%)' or \fIfile\fR message.
.sp
.LP
In the following commands, \fIi\fR is a numerical argument (\fB1\fR by
default).
.sp
.ne 2
.na
\fB\fIi\fRSPACE \fR
.ad
.RS 13n
Display another screenful, or \fIi\fR more lines if \fIi\fR is specified.
.RE

.sp
.ne 2
.na
\fB\fIi\fRRETURN \fR
.ad
.RS 13n
Display another line, or \fIi\fR more lines, if specified.
.RE

.sp
.ne 2
.na
\fB\fIi\fR\fBb\fR\fR
.ad
.br
.na
\fB\fIi\fR\fB^B\fR\fR
.ad
.RS 13n
(Control-b) Skip back \fIi\fR screenfuls and then print a screenful.
.RE

.sp
.ne 2
.na
\fB\fIi\fR\fBd\fR\fR
.ad
.br
.na
\fB\fIi\fR\fB^D\fR\fR
.ad
.RS 13n
(Control-d) Scroll forward one half screenful or \fIi\fR more lines. If \fIi\fR
is specified, the count becomes the default for subsequent \fBd\fR and \fBu\fR
commands.
.RE

.sp
.ne 2
.na
\fB\fIi\fR\fBf\fR\fR
.ad
.RS 13n
Skip \fIi\fR screens full and then print a screenful.
.RE

.sp
.ne 2
.na
\fB\fBh\fR\fR
.ad
.RS 13n
Help. Give a description of all the \fBmore\fR commands.
.RE

.sp
.ne 2
.na
\fB\fB^L\fR \fR
.ad
.RS 13n
(Control-l) Refresh.
.RE

.sp
.ne 2
.na
\fB\fIi\fR\fBn\fR\fR
.ad
.RS 13n
Search for the \fIi\|\fRth occurrence of the last \fIpattern\fR entered.
.RE

.sp
.ne 2
.na
\fB\fBq\fR \fR
.ad
.br
.na
\fB\fBQ\fR \fR
.ad
.RS 13n
Exit from \fBmore\fR.
.RE

.sp
.ne 2
.na
\fB\fIi\fR\fBs\fR\fR
.ad
.RS 13n
Skip \fIi\fR lines and then print a screenful.
.RE

.sp
.ne 2
.na
\fB\fBv\fR\fR
.ad
.RS 13n
Drop into the \fBvi\fR editor at the current line of the current file.
.RE

.sp
.ne 2
.na
\fB\fIi\fR\fBz\fR\fR
.ad
.RS 13n
Same as SPACE, except that \fIi\fR, if present, becomes the new default number
of lines per screenful.
.RE

.sp
.ne 2
.na
\fB\fB=\fR \fR
.ad
.RS 13n
Display the current line number.
.RE

.sp
.ne 2
.na
\fB\fIi\fR\fB/\fR\fIpattern\fR\fR
.ad
.RS 13n
Search forward for the \fIi\|\fRth occurrence of the regular expression
\fIpattern\fR. Display the screenful starting two lines before the line that
contains the \fIi\|\fRth match for the regular expression \fIpattern\fR, or the
end of a pipe, whichever comes first. If \fBmore\fR is displaying a file and
there is no match, its position in the file remains unchanged. Regular
expressions can be edited using erase and kill characters. Erasing back past
the first column cancels the search command.
.RE

.sp
.ne 2
.na
\fB\fB!\fR\fIcommand\fR\fR
.ad
.RS 13n
Invoke a shell to execute \fIcommand\|\fR. The characters \fB%\fR and \fB!\fR,
when used within \fIcommand\fR are replaced with the current filename and the
previous shell command, respectively. If there is no current filename, \fB%\fR
is not expanded. Prepend a backslash to these characters to escape expansion.
.RE

.sp
.ne 2
.na
\fB\fB:f\fR\fR
.ad
.RS 13n
Display the current filename and line number.
.RE

.sp
.ne 2
.na
\fB\fIi\fR\fB:n\fR\fR
.ad
.RS 13n
Skip to the \fIi\|\fRth next filename given in the command line, or to the last
filename in the list if \fIi\fR is out of range.
.RE

.sp
.ne 2
.na
\fB\fIi\fR\fB:p\fR\fR
.ad
.RS 13n
Skip to the \fIi\|\fRth previous filename given in the command line, or to the
first filename if \fIi\fR is out of range. If given while \fBmore\fR is
positioned within a file, go to the beginning of the file. If \fBmore\fR is
reading from a pipe, \fBmore\fR simply rings the terminal bell.
.RE

.sp
.ne 2
.na
\fB\fB:q\fR\fR
.ad
.br
.na
\fB\fB:Q\fR\fR
.ad
.RS 13n
Exit from \fBmore\fR (same as \fBq\fR or \fBQ\fR).
.RE

.sp
.ne 2
.na
\fB\fB\&'\fR\fR
.ad
.RS 9n
Single quote. Go to the point from which the last search started. If no search
has been performed in the current file, go to the beginning of the file.
.RE

.sp
.ne 2
.na
\fB\fB\&.\fR\fR
.ad
.RS 9n
Dot. Repeat the previous command.
.RE

.sp
.ne 2
.na
\fB\fB^\|\e\fR\fR
.ad
.RS 9n
Halt a partial display of text. \fBmore\fR stops sending output, and displays
the usual \fB--More--\fR prompt. Some output is lost as a result.
.RE

.SS "Large File Behavior"
See \fBlargefile\fR(7) for the description of the behavior of \fBmore\fR and
\fBpage\fR when encountering files greater than or equal to 2 Gbyte ( 2^31
bytes).
.SH ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES
See \fBenviron\fR(7) for descriptions of the following environment variables
that affect the execution of \fBmore\fR: \fBLANG\fR, \fBLC_ALL\fR,
\fBLC_CTYPE\fR,
\fBLC_MESSAGES\fR, \fBNLSPATH\fR, and \fBTERM\fR.

.SH EXIT STATUS
The following exit values are returned:
.sp
.ne 2
.na
\fB\fB0\fR \fR
.ad
.RS 7n
Successful completion.
.RE

.sp
.ne 2
.na
\fB\fB>0\fR \fR
.ad
.RS 7n
An error occurred.
.RE

.SH FILES
.ne 2
.na
\fB\fB/usr/lib/more.help\fR\fR
.ad
.RS 22n
help file for \fB/usr/bin/more\fR and \fB/usr/bin/page\fR.
.RE

.SH ATTRIBUTES
See \fBattributes\fR(7) for descriptions of the following attributes:
.SS "/usr/bin/more /usr/bin/page"
.TS
box;
c | c
l | l .
ATTRIBUTE TYPE	ATTRIBUTE VALUE
_
CSI	Not enabled
.TE

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR cat (1),
.BR csh (1),
.BR ctags (1),
.BR less (1),
.BR man (1),
.BR nroff (1),
.BR script (1),
.BR sh (1),
.BR ul (1),
.BR regcomp (3C)
.BR terminfo (5),
.BR attributes (7),
.BR environ (7),
.BR largefile (7),
.BR standards (7)
.SH NOTES
Skipping backwards is too slow on large files.
